The G318 is one of the craziest things we've seen in all of China.  And that's saying a lot.

The G318 is China's most cycled road. You see, it's popular for adventursome Chinese tourists wanting to see the breadth of the country to bike from various EastC China destination, across the country to Sichuan, and then across Tibet to Lhasa.  The G318, also knows as the Sichuan-Tibet highway, connects Chengdu to Lhasa, climbing the western Sichuan mountains to reach the Tibetan Plateau.

So far so good.  But here are some things to know about this road.  [[First, the "G" in G318 stands for "Guo" or "Country," meaning this is a national level road -- the equivalent of a U.S. Interstate.  It's a major artery for commercial traffic and [civilian] transport.  Think something like I-70, as it climbs from Denver, Colorado up to the Eisenhower tunnel in the Rockies.

But now take that mental image, and adjust it in two critical ways.  First, the Western Sichuan mountains make the Rockies look like foothills.  From Denver to the Eisenhower Tunnel, I-70 climbs for XX miles, ascending just over XX feet -- nearly a vertical mile. Impressive. But the G318 -- this insane road climbs for YY miles, ascending a mindblowing 13,500 -- from Chengdu, which sits just 500 feet above sea level, to the XX Pass, at 14,XXX feet.

Nearly half this ascent happens in just the last XX miles, as the G318 climbs from the mountain town of Kangding. And really, it's the last killer stretch of the G318 that is the most mindblowing. In just the last ZZ miles to the pass, the G318 climbs WW feet over NN crazy switchbacks.

So that's one important difference between the G318 and America's closest comparison. Here's the second: the G318 is just two lanes wide.  With no shoulders.  

So here's the image oto conjour in your mind: dozens of huge commercial trucks, fully loaded with coal, lumber, you name it, straining the outer limits of their engines' ability as they groan and chug and churn their way up this insane road's crazy grades. That's the uphill lane.  

In the downhill lane, a similar volume of trucks--with their multi-ton cargo--strains to keep some semblance of control as they careen *down* those equally steep slopes. If their brakes fail? Runaway truck lanes -- not so much.  

Ok. Now add to this picture carloads upon carloads of Chinese tourists headed to scenic destinations in the mountains. These cars are stuck in long, snaking lines behind the giant commerical trucks, chug-chug-chugging up the mountain at a glacial pace. This state of affairs apparently pushes many a driver over to certifiable insanity. For, with shocking regularity, one (or more) of these acending cars suddenly steers into the opposite lane, facing down the many tons of certian death careening down the mountain towards him (or her), guns his engine, and races to whip around the long line of traffic ahead of him before he is unceremoniously impaled on the grill of on one of the many monster trucks headed his way. And there's no margin for error in this deadly game because, remember, no shoulders.

You would think that only the ascending drivers would run this ridiculous gamble with death.  But shockingly, the downward headed cars do it to.

Got all this?  Now let's add our bikers. Scores upon scores upon scores of bikers. Some ever so slowly and painfully grinding their way up the mountain.  Many others, defeated by the grades, walking their bikes. (Virtually all the bikes are going uphill because they're headed in the Tibet direction.)

The thing is, this two-lane, shoulderless, insanely mountainous Chinese interstate -- well, it's not really wide enough for two cars and a bike.  And certainly not for two monster trucks and a bike. So every time a truck or a car comes along a biker (and this is very, very often), the ascending driver has to edge out into the oncoming traffic.  Including, yes, those downward charging, heavily loaded, nearly out of control, giant trucks. And the inexplicably impatient carloads of tourists trying to pass them.

Sound like fun yet? How about blindfolded?

That's right. Because, you see, at 14,000 feet, there are a lot of clouds. So the top stretch of the G318 is frequently entirey whited out. We're talking maybe 100 feet of visability. Maybe.

You will notice that we have no pictures of video of this complete, mindblowing, terrifying mayhem.  That is becuase the entire time we were on this road, we were fearing for our lives.  And the last thing we wanted to do was devote even one iota of attention to operating a camera.

Indeed, the twenty minutes we spent climbing on this road, and the hour and a half we spent descending, amounted to among the scariest two hours of our entire lives. Our friends at Bike Asia put on this road for about 30 miles becuase for that one short stretch in the mountains there really is no alternative. And unlike the other bikers, we were descending, which meant we were going much faster and so were passed much less often. But God help us if we ever have to cycle a road even one tenth as crazy as this again. Just thinking about it is nearly enough to make us swear off roadbiking forever.

Did we mention that this is the most cycled road in all of China?




